[Music]
the ancient Greeks had a great idea the
universe is simple in their minds all
you needed to make it were four elements
earth air fire and water as theories go
it's a beautiful one
it has simplicity and elegance it says
that by combining the four basic
elements in different ways you can
produce all the wonderful diversity of
the universe earth and fire for example
give you things that are dry air and
water things that are wet but as
theories go it had a problem it didn't
predict anything that could be measured
and measurement is the basis of
experimental science worse still the
theory was wrong but the Greeks were
great scientists of the mind and in the
fifth century BC Lucifer's of my letters
came up with one of the most enduring
scientific ideas ever everything we see
is made up of tiny indivisible bits of
stuff called atoms
this theory is simple and elegant and it
has the advantage over the earth air
fire and water theory of being right
centuries of scientific thought and
experimentation have established that
the real elements things like hydrogen
carbon and iron can be broken down into
atoms in Lewis's theory the atom is the
smallest indivisible bit of stuff that's
still recognizable as hydrogen carbon or
iron the only thing wrong with Lewis's
idea is that atoms are in fact divisible
furthermore his atoms idea turns out to
explain just a small part of what the
universe is made of what appears to be
the ordinary stuff of the universe is in
fact quite rare loose puces atoms and
the things they're made of actually make
up only about 5% of what we know to be
there physicists know the rest of the
universe 95% of it as the dark universe
made of dark matter and dark energy how
do we know this well we know because we
look at things and we see them that
might seem rather simplistic but it's
actually quite profound all the stuff
that's made of atoms is visible light
bounces off it and we can see it when we
look out into space we see stars and
galaxies some of them like the one we
live in with beautiful spiral shapes
spinning gracefully through space when
scientists first measured the motion of
groups of galaxies in the 1930s and
weighed the amount of
they contained they were in for a
surprise they found that there's not
enough visible stuff in those groups to
hold them together later measurements of
individual galaxies confirmed this
puzzling result there's simply not
enough visible stuff in galaxies to
provide enough gravity to hold them
together from what we can see they ought
to fly apart but they don't so there
must be stuff there that we can't see we
call that stuff dark matter the best
evidence for dark matter today comes
from measurements of something called
the Cosmic Microwave Background the
afterglow of the Big Bang but that's
another story
all of the evidence we have says that
dark matter is there and accounts for
much of the stuff in those beautiful
spiral galaxies that fill the heavens so
where does that leave us we've long
known that the heavens do not revolve
around us and that we residents of a
fairly ordinary planet orbiting a fairly
ordinary star in a spiral arm of a
fairly ordinary galaxy the discovery of
dark matter took us one step further
away from the center of things it told
us that the stuff we made of is only a
small fraction of what makes up the
universe but there was more to come
early this century scientists studying
the outer reaches of the universe
confirmed that not only is everything
moving apart from everything else as
you'd expect in a universe that began in
a hot dense Big Bang but the universe's
expansion also seems to be accelerating
what's that about either there's some
kind of energy pushing this acceleration
just like you provide energy to
accelerate a car or gravity does not
behave exactly as we think most
scientists think it's the former that
there's some kind of energy driving the
acceleration and they've called it dark
energy
today's best measurements allow us to
work out just how much of the universe
is dark it looks as if dark energy makes
up about 68% of the universe and dark
matter about 27% leaving just 5% for us
and everything else we can actually see
so what's the dark stuff made of we
don't know but there's one theory called
supersymmetry that could explain some of
it supersymmetry or Susy for short
predicts a whole range of new particles
some of which could make up the dark
matter if we found evidence for Susy we
can go from understanding 5% of our
universe the things we can actually see
to around 1/3 not bad for a day's work
dark energy will probably be harder to
understand but there are some
speculative theories out there that
might point the way
among them a theories that go back to
that first great idea of the ancient
Greeks the idea that we began with
several minutes ago the idea that the
universe must be simple these theories
predict that there is just a single
element from which all the universe is
wonderful diversity stems a vibrating
string the idea is that all the
particles we know today are just
different harmonics on the string
unfortunately string theories today are
as yet untested all but with so much of
the universe waiting to be explored the
stakes are high does all this make you
feel small it shouldn't
instead you should marvel in the fact
that as far as we know you are a member
of the only species in the universe able
even to begin to grasp it's wonders and
you're living at the right time to see
our understanding explode
[Music]